Germany is complicit in Israel's
genocide in Gaza and that must end
that's Nicaragua's argument before the
un's top Court Germany says Nicaragua
has a one-sided view of the war in Gaza
what does this case mean for countries
supplying Israel with weapons this is
Inside
[Music]
Story
hello there I'm James Bay Nicaragua has
asked the international court of justice
to order Germany to stop supplying
Israel with weapons immediately it
argues Berlin is complicit in genocide
taking place in Gaza the case joins two
others involving Israel already before
the icj Nicaragua's case is more broad
drawing on both the genocide and Geneva
conventions and is notable for being the
first to involve two countries not
Direct ly involved in the alleged
atrocities governments around the world
will undoubtedly take notice Germany is
the second largest weapons Supply to
Israel after the United States so what
does this case mean for other countries
that contribute to Israel's extensive
military Network could third parties be
held accountable for enabling a genocide
we'll discuss all of this with our panel
of guests in just a moment but first
this report from Alexandra
bers 80 years after the Holocaust
Germany is being accused of facilitating
genocide Nicaragua is calling on the
international court of justice to stop
all German arms exports to Israel it
argues the Israeli Army is using those
weapons and ammunition against
Palestinians in Gaza and by extension
Berlin is enabling acts of genocide the
Norms of the genocide convention which
are part of customary international law
imposed the obligation on thir states to
to undertake to prevent genocide this
obligation arises from the moment that
that state becomes aware that genocide
might be committed and there can be no
question that Germany as is evident from
the preceding comments was well aware
and is well aware of at least the
serious risk of genocide being
committed Germany is the second largest
armed supplier to Israel after the US
and its exports include Torpedoes
submarine parts anti-tank weapons and
Military protective gear Berlin
recognizes the icj's jurisdiction the US
does not lawyers for Germany have
dismissed Nicaragua's accusations as
biased and say Berlin is doing all it
can to fulfill its obligations to both
Palestinians and Israelis Germany only
supplies arms on the basis of detailed
scrutiny a scrutiny that not only
respects but far exceeds the
requirements of international
law arms exports that take into account
the security threats Israel is facing in
particular immediately after 7
October at the same time Germany's
supply of arms and other military
equipment to Israel is subject to a
continuous evaluation of the situation
on the ground The Landmark case joins
two others currently before the un's top
Court South Africa accused Israel of
committing icide in Gaza which the court
found was plausible and the icj has
accepted a motion by the UN General
Assembly on the legality of Israel's
occupation of the Palestinian
territories now Nicaragua's case could
have consequences for governments around
the world can countries that are not
committing atrocities directly still be
held responsible for them Alexandra
buers Al jazer for Inside
Story
let's dig deeper into the significance
of this case and what of any difference
it'll make with our guests today from
weisbard in Germany we're joined by
Matas Goldman a senior research fellow
at the max plank Institute for
comparative Public Law and international
law in hia Dianna bhau a Palestinian
lawyer and advocate of the Palestinian
cause and in New York Kenneth Roth is a
visiting professor at the Princeton
School of Public and international
Affairs he was the executive director of
human rights watch thank you for joining
me all of you we have an eminent panel
of lawyers today I am not a lawyer Ken
though so let's start in layman's
language in your view how strong is this
case well it's based on you know a very
simple premise which is that you should
not be arming a government that is
committing war crimes let alone
plausible genocide as the international
court of justice has called it now
there's actually a precedent for this
you may remember back to the former
Liberian president Charles Taylor he was
convicted of aiding and eding war crimes
and other atrocities in neighboring
sarra Leone because he armed an abusive
Rebel group there and he's currently
serving a 50-year prison Trum in a
British prison so there is precedent for
this now the international court of
justice is a civil court it's not a
criminal court but this premise that you
shouldn't be arming a country and
Military that's committing atrocities
is you know morally simple and legally
straightforward Matas let me ask you um
about the comments from the Nicaraguan
Ambassador who opened the case for
Nicaragua now to be clear you don't
represent the German government here you
are German and a German lawyer um he
said there's no question that Germany
was well aware and is well aware of at
least the serious risk of genocide being
committed what do you make of that basic
case well James I think it's it's a very
good proposition to start the case and I
think that Nicaragua has um made a very
strong presentation in the sense that
they gave a they displayed the problems
that many people around the world have
with weapons deliveries
in to Israel in in the current conflict
so I I would say that in some to some
extent they really exposed the double
standards of uh the Western world
and uh that is from a moral point of
view a very strong case which they made
whether that is going to be a successful
case before the international court of
justice is a little bit different
because the international court of
justice is bound by rules of procedure
and uh you know the the the substantive
International legal Provisions
applicable in the case and in that
regard the complication is that it's
quite an indirect way in which Nicaragua
is challenging Germany's acts so it's um
actually criticizing or it's suing
Germany for acts to which Germany
contributes which however have been
committed by Israel and this indirect
way of tackling the conflict of bringing
the conflict to the court May ultimately
have an impact on the success of
Nicaragua's case even though many people
would agree that there have been
violations of international humanitarian
law and even though the question whether
a genocide is unfolding is uh is still
pending in a different case before the
court Dian you are a lawyer to and
former legal adviser to the Palestinian
Liberation Organization the PLO but
actually I'd like to start with you
taking off your legal hat and tell me
what do Palestinians make of this case
are they following it what do they make
of
it they're not following it as closely
as they were following obviously the
South African case but they are indeed
following it and there's a reason for
that uh it's because Palestinians have
tried everything we've tried diplomatic
means we've tried to push for Statehood
we've tried practically everything and
the world time and again has failed
Palestinians and so now Palestinians are
looking and saying isn't it time that
these s systems that particularly the
Europeans have been wagging their
fingers at us for for decades saying
that we should be using legal systems
it's time to test those legal systems
and see whether the law actually does
apply to Israel or whether Israel is
above the law so people are indeed
following it and this really is a test
of this along with the other cases of
course is a test of the legal system and
the robustness of the legal system is it
a system in which it applies to some
countries or is it a system in which it
applies to all and if it applies to all
then we must start seeing that Israel is
held accountable through sanctions
through arms embargos and through other
mechanisms as well Ken let me ask you a
question that when I was doing the
research for this program puzzled me a
bit which is why is Nicaragua not suing
the United States and I did a lot of
reading about this it seems to go back
to the Reagan Administration and the
case again involving Nicaragua versus
the US and after that um the US decided
not to recognize some of the icj's
jurisdiction can you explain it a bit
more a bit better to me for me please
James it's a it's a bit that it's a bit
the way that the United States ratified
the genocide convention but to put it
very simply um the US has not submitted
to the jurisdiction of the international
court of justice on a blanket basis but
only Case by case meaning it would have
to consent to be sued by Nicaragua
whereas Germany has consented in a
blanket basis Nicaragua could sue in
this case and Germany was stuck with it
so that's why Germany the second largest
arms provider was sued rather than the
United States now you know it's worth at
some point in this show mentioning that
you know Nicaragua is a poor plaintiff
here you know it's a brutal dictatorship
it's one of the most repressive
countries in Latin America um that's
irrelevant to the merits of the case but
it's unfortunate that Nicaragua was the
plain of here now let's say a word if we
could about the German defense here
because German lawyers kind of put forth
three arguments none of them are very
good um one of them was like oh we
support Palestinian rights but you know
who cares if you're also arming Israel
as it bombs and starves Palestinian
civilians um you know second it said
Israel is not committing war crimes you
know which is just laughable I mean
anybody can see that it is and the third
that really goes to the heart of the
German state today it's that it's a stop
res it's a reason for the state as a
results of the Nazi responsibility for
the Holocaust to support Israel
and that in my view is the wrong lesson
of the Holocaust the lesson of Holocaust
should be that you oppose atrocities you
oppose war crimes whoever commits them
even if they're by the Israeli
government rather than that you support
the Israeli government even if it's
committing war crimes and plausible
genocide it's the wrong
lesson Matas your take on that your the
German on the panel give us your view of
the historical context and as Ken say
says there he believes that Germany's
learned the long the wrong
lesson definitely this is a valid
argument to be made there is a a quite a
vivid debate I would say at the moment
whether this um position this policy
position of the German government that
the security of Israel is part of
Germany's reason of state is still valid
and and should still be maintained in
particular if it is understood as a kind
of blanket support for whatever Israel
does I think you could see over the last
couple of weeks that the German
government has tried to at least
publicly articulate its concern for the
humanitarian situation in Gaza several
times and of course ultimately that
will will will pose the question to what
extent Germany will unconditionally
support Israel and at some point that
will also raise the question to what
extent one can cooperate with Israel in
a military
respect Deanna this like the South
Africa case is likely to go on for a
very long time but I think Nicaragua
probably like South Africa cares about
the immediate measures the court puts in
place what are called the provisional
measures now they're calling for Germany
to immediately suspend its Aid to Israel
particularly the military uh the
Military Arms shipments but also
important it says it must resume its
support and financing of unra unra being
the UN agency that is the main
humanitarian agency operating in Gaza
how important is
that the only way that Aid at this point
in time can be effectively delivered in
the Gaza Strip is through those bodies
that have had a history of delivering
that Aid and that is Ana and the fact
that we saw that immediately uh the day
after the the order for provisional
measures came out that Israel made these
false allegations against unwa
allegations that have not been proven
and for which there's been no
investigation and immediately we saw
that countries cut off Aid it was a
means by which Israel was able to
overshadow the provisional measures
decision and turn turn people's uh
attention to a different issue now I
think it's important to bear in mind
Israel has not complied with the
provisional measures order that came out
in January and it continues to be in
violation of not only that but of the
other um demands as well for a ceasefire
and you name it so this request that
Israel that uh that the Germany not only
stop giving weapons to Israel but also
resume Aid is a means through a
backhanded way of actually giving
support to Palestinians at a time when
Israel has made it clear that they
intend to carry out genocide and they
are in fact carrying out genocide and
it's worth stating that Germany in its
um submission in the court said it was
the biggest supplier to humanitarian Aid
to the opt that's the technical term
occupied Palestinian territory and isra
and Germany's been continuing to supply
Aid even now including air drops and on
that point perhaps it's worth listening
to what one of the Nicaraguan lawyers
Daniel Mller
said it is indeed a pathetic excuse to
the pal Palestinian children women and
men in Gaza to provide humanitarian Aid
including through air drops on the one
hand and to furnish the weapons and
military equipment that are used to kill
and humiliate them and to kill also
humanitarian Aid workers as most
recently evidenced by the missile itch
against vehicles and workers of world
Central Kitchen on the other hand what
do you think of that
Ken well he's completely right and I
would add to that which is is that the
airdrops are really a drop in the bucket
everybody recognizes that the only way
to alleviate the large scale starvation
in Gaza is through delivery by truck but
the same Israeli Army that Germany is
Army is obstructing that Aid delivery
it's letting in drips and drabs of food
but it's imposing these inspection
regimes which force trucks to wait you
know after three weeks many of them
don't get through at all um it has been
making it extremely difficult to
distribute Aid within Gaza Diana rightly
says that unra is with its 30,000
employees is the only agency capable of
really doing Mass distribution in Gaza
um Israel was trying to shut that down
because you know and near 12 people
allegedly without proof participated in
the October 7th attack they were all
either dismissed or two of them had were
said to have died so unred did
everything it could with those 12 people
but Israel saw an opportunity here it
has had data against unra for decades
because it sees anra as the way that
Palestinian
refugees continue to hope to return to
Israel now that's not unra is doing you
know Palestinian refugees know that
they're Palestinian refugees whether
unra is there or not they long to return
to their ancestral home whether or not
there's unra but Israel despite knowing
that it's aggravating starvation has
been on this Vendetta against unra and
while Germany has now resumed funding of
unra elsewhere in the region it
continues not to fund unra in Gaza where
unra is the key to alleviating potential
famine Dean I know you like all of our
panel have been watching the
developments in the ha on Monday
Nicaragua's case on Tuesday Germany's
response tell me in terms of the whole
case how much is this new legal ground
and could there be a legal precedent
here it's hard for me to say because I
have a fear I fear that what the court
is going to do instead is wait for the
larger case in relation to South that
South Africa brought forward um to wait
to deal with that first that's that's my
fear and so it's hard to say it is
important to bear in mind though and um
both of my co-panelists have said this
very eloquently there is a
responsibility not just on Israel to not
uh carry out genocide but there's also
responsibility on third States as well
to to prevent genocide from happening as
well and this case speaks about the idea
of prevention of genocide we already
know what Israel is doing it's made its
intentions very clear we see the actions
on the ground we see the force
starvation we see everything that it's
doing and now it's really imperative for
the world to act whether the court takes
that that same route and says yes indeed
we're going to be issuing some measures
is an entirely different matter but it
is important for the world to understand
that it that this isn't just upon Israel
to stop genocide it also requires that
other countries around the world every
country around the world act and make
sure that Palestinians are not um are
not subjected to this genocide the
problem with that mataas is is we've
already seen the court act with its
provisional measures twice uh with
regard to the South Africa um case they
where they reacted and then they came
back again and said you're still not
doing it um the Court's rulings are
legally binding are they not but the
problem is it doesn't have any sort of
enforcement
mechanism well you know James um to be
legally binding doesn't mean necessarily
that you have to be able to send troops
or a police force to enforce them
otherwise it would be for not and to be
legally binding can have consequences uh
for countries for example they might um
have to pay reparations if they violate
International legal rules at some point
point and U that could be enforced by
governments that or by you know
ultimately by Palestine which in this
case is the party to to whom these
obligations like the obligation to
respect humanitarian law the obligation
not to commit genocide are owned and uh
there are ways of enforcing these uh
reparations even though that can be a
lengthy process but that doesn't mean at
all that it's uh it's totally irrelevant
moreover I would say that in a case in
which Germany is being sued um as one of
the you know one of the largest economic
Powers but also a um political power at
least in Europe if Germany gets a um an
order to respect certain conditions and
uh if it is seen to be in violation of
that order it's a reputational damage of
sorts so should that happen Germany
would have all reasons to respect it
because otherwise you cannot go around
and base your foreign policy on the
premise that you're respecting
international law which is one of the
you know the basic tension that Germany
is uh having here on the one hand it's
historical responsibility on the other
hand it's commitment to international
law and to build a credible foreign
policy which might be important for many
different things it needs to respect
International or at least needs to be
able to make a plausible case to respect
international law and you can't do that
any longer if the international court of
justice is telling you that you're in
violation okay let's have a quick look
at where Israel is getting its weapons
from Germany is the second L largest
provider of arms to Israel accounting
for 30% of all its weapons Imports the
US is by far its largest supplier it
gives Israel annual military aid worth
3.8 billion do last year Germany
increased deliveries nearly tenfold to
350 $4 million most were improved
approved in the immediate aftermath of
hamas's October the 7th attack on
Southern Israel since 2015 the UK's
contributions amount to more than half a
billion dollars and include components
for F35 fighter jets also since 2015
Canada has sent military equipment worth
$84 million to Israel before it
suspended exports in February can Canada
yes Belgium Italy the Netherlands and
Spain they're all countries that have
suspended or restricted arm sales to
Israel are we slowly seeing Israel's um
pipeline of weapons drying
up I mean James yes and no um other
governments are slowly ending this
supply of arms but by far in a way the
most important supplier as you noted is
the United States and Joe Biden has been
reluctant to take that step this also
comes back to your prior question you
know an international court of justice
ice ruling is binding Israel is you know
legally required to comply with the
precautionary measures to avoid
plausible genocide it hasn't done that
um one way to force compliance would be
through the UN Security Council but that
requires contending with the UN us veto
the other would be simply for powerful
governments like the United States to
say we are going to stop the military
aid we're going to stop the arm sales
until okay okay well let me ask you
about the let me ask you specifically
about us Ken right now because we had at
the end of last week 37 members of
Congress including the former house
Speaker Nancy Pelosi write a letter
saying that if um that uh in light of
the recent strike against Aid workers we
believe it's unjustifiable to Pro to
approve weapons transfers there are
something called the Lehi laws um the
former Senator Patrick lehy who put
those laws in place who they're named
after says the US is now breaking the
law is are things in your view changing
now in the US or
not yes James in the sense that there is
mounting pressure on buiding to do the
right thing to condition further
military aid or arm sales on an end to
Israel's bombing and starving of
Palestinian civilians in Gaza so there's
tons of pressure there he certainly you
know would be within the law to do that
he's just resistant and it is a bit of a
puzzle why that is part of it is he
seems to sort of think of Israel back in
1967 when it was David surrounded by the
Goliath of the combined Arab armies you
know partly it's just that um you know
he's thinking about this coming election
in November and is focused you know on
the movable middle the handful of
Independence in the six swing States and
is basically taken for granted the
progressive side of the democratic party
that's beginning to change with the
Michigan primary with or a large number
of uncommitted Voters suggested that you
know some Democrats might just stay home
and not vote at all you know Biden says
oh they won't vote for Trump but if they
don't vote for anybody that's effective
a vote for Trump so he's taking that for
granted that said because there is
mounting American pressure to stop
aiding and abetting these war crimes
this plausible genocide in Gaza um Biden
is under pressure to do the right thing
and we know that in his conversation
just last week Netanyahu he sort of
began to hint that maybe at some point
in the future us relations would be
affected if by if Netanyahu didn't
change but it's still very mushy there
still is not an explicit conditionality
imposed on the military aid in the armed
sence Matas let me ask you how are
things changing in terms of the public
discourse in Germany I saw there was a
group of 600 German civil servants who
again wrote a petition saying that
Israel is committing crimes in Gaza in
contradiction of international law and
therefore in contradiction to the
Constitution do you notice a change in
Germany
now I do notice a change in Germany now
I think that immediately
after October 7 there was a lot of
solidarity uh towards Israel I think
there is still solidarity in particular
for you know the victims of these
attacks for the hostages but criticism
of Israel is rising I I notice at least
in parts of the German public that we
increasingly have a more nuanced
understanding of
Israel which means that um we don't take
netanyahu's position and his government
M's position in which um you know quite
problematic uh ministers are assembled
at least to some extent we don't take
that to be um the the be all and end all
of Israel we recognize that there's a
plurality of views in Israel there's
there has been lots of demonstrations in
Tel Aviv and all around Israel actually
and much of that is also perceived in
Germany and so people are
increasingly seeing that you know
there's there's not one clear it's very
difficult to put yourself on one side of
this conflict given how it is unfolding
and that of course has also an impact on
how Germany should should act in
particular in respect of weapons at the
court today Germany was trying to make
the argument that it is not delivering
weapons that could be lethal in a sense
you know not war weapons in a very
narrow sense with which you can shoot it
was only delivering equipment second
that um its deliveries had decreased or
its um its issuance of permits for
weapons exports had decreased since
October and that's all valid arguments
to make but what I wonder is can you
really deliver any weapons in the
current situation as opposed to
October where many people ask themselves
um if there is any other way of
providing humanitarian Aid to Gaza other
than through a fire so that is a
responsibility that many people now see
very clearly and they also think about
Germany's long-term Prospect of
maintaining its um its status it's
standing as a you know a a law
respecting country so I do inist see
changes here okay thank you very much to
all our guests today Matas Goldman
Dianna BAU and Kenneth Roth and thanks
to you too for watching for more
coverage on the cases before the I CJ
plus background and Analysis of the war
on Gaza please visit our website al.com
if you have comments on all this you can
post them on our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory or find us
on X look for AJ insid story from me
James Bay and the team here in doart
please stay safe bye-bye for
[Music]
now